README.md, before:

# rcell2

Functions to analyze Cell-ID single-cell cytometry data in a tidy and shiny framework.

A CellID wrapper is also on the works. Checkout the `cellid_master` branch.

## Branch notes

Try out the CellID binary at `inst/cell` (in the package directory of `rcell2`).

Once you've installed the package, the binary's path can be obtained with: `system.file("cell", package = "rcell2", mustWork = T)`

# Installation

## Dependencies

Most of the dependencies are listed in the `DESCRIPTION` file, and should install automatically.

Install the [```tidyverse```][1] meta-package (and use it, you'll not regret it) and [```devtools```][2]. In addition, install [```EBImage```][3] package (required to look at cells) by copying and running the following script. 

```
install.packages(c("tidyverse", "devtools"))

if (!requireNamespace("BiocManager", quietly = TRUE))
    install.packages("BiocManager")

BiocManager::install("EBImage")
```

Also install `imagemagick` on your system; this is required by R's `magick` package. All the major operating systems are supported by ImageMagick: https://imagemagick.org/script/download.php

For Ubuntu, Arch and Brew (macOS) these commands may come in handy:

```
# Aptitude
sudo apt install imagemagick

# Pacman
sudo pacman -S imagemagick

# macOS .dmg
# https://imagemagick.org/script/download.php
```

## Installing the package

Install using `devtools`, directly from github repo:

```
devtools::install_github("darksideoftheshmoo/rcell2")

```

# New R-Shiny tools for cytometry data

An R-Shiny app will help users filter data graphically, with live image previews.
While the image part may be tailored for data from fluorescence microscopy experiments, the graphical filter in this app is general purpose (i.e. useful in standard cell cytometry).

There is also another small app to "tag" single cells in the dataset with user defined options.

See:

  * `?rcell2::rcell2::shinyCell()`
  * `?rcell2::rcell2::tagCell()`
  * `?rcell2::rcell2::plotApp()`

# New Hu Moment functions for raw cell segmentation data

We implemented the `Hu moments` descriptors in R, and use them on masks generated by CellID. Note that the masks must be generated by the the CellID `mask_mod` branch (see: https://github.com/darksideoftheshmoo/cellID-linux/tree/mask_mod) either by TSV output or by encoding CellIDs in the pixel intensities of boundary and/or interior points.

# New kmeans filtering functions

The kmeans algotrithm helps filter cells based on clustering of CellID's variables computed from morphological and fluorescence information.

Use k-means and check out images of cells in each cluster. Then, filter them easily by cluster number.

See: `?rcell2::kmeans_clustering`

# Todo

* ~~Plot of a 2D grid of "representative" single cell images in a scatterplot (similar to EBImage).~~ Implemented in cellSpread, cellSpreadPlot, and "Pics" type plot in shinyCell.
* ~~Generic shiny function for filtering points in a custom ggplot~~. Implemented in plotApp.
* 1D / histogram filtering support in the filtering app.

[1]:https://www.tidyverse.org/
[2]:https://github.com/r-lib/devtools
[3]:https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/EBImage.html

Commit message:

adde compilation notes to readme

README.md, after:

# rcell2

Functions to analyze Cell-ID single-cell cytometry data in a tidy and shiny framework.

A CellID wrapper is also on the works. Checkout the `cellid_master` branch.

## Branch notes

Try out the CellID binary at `inst/cell` (in the package directory of `rcell2`).

Once you've installed the package, the binary's path can be obtained with: `system.file("cell", package = "rcell2", mustWork = T)`

### Compilation notes

CellID is compiled with make and the GCC during package installation, linking to several dynamic libraries. These must be available: `-lzstd -llzma -ljpeg -lz -lm -lwebp`

Previously we only linked to `-ltiff`, but it is now bundled and compiled internally with `cmake` before CellID.

CellID is now linked to the bundled `libtiff` statically, and for this we needed the extra dynamic links to `zstd`, `liblzma`, `libjpeg`, `libz`, `libwebp`.

The `libm` library is the standard math C library, required by CellID.

# Installation

## Dependencies

Most of the dependencies are listed in the `DESCRIPTION` file, and should install automatically.

Install the [```tidyverse```][1] meta-package (and use it, you'll not regret it) and [```devtools```][2]. In addition, install [```EBImage```][3] package (required to look at cells) by copying and running the following script. 

```
install.packages(c("tidyverse", "devtools"))

if (!requireNamespace("BiocManager", quietly = TRUE))
    install.packages("BiocManager")

BiocManager::install("EBImage")
```

Also install `imagemagick` on your system; this is required by R's `magick` package. All the major operating systems are supported by ImageMagick: https://imagemagick.org/script/download.php

For Ubuntu, Arch and Brew (macOS) these commands may come in handy:

```
# Aptitude
sudo apt install imagemagick

# Pacman
sudo pacman -S imagemagick

# macOS .dmg
# https://imagemagick.org/script/download.php
```

## Installing the package

Install using `devtools`, directly from github repo:

```
devtools::install_github("darksideoftheshmoo/rcell2")

```

# New R-Shiny tools for cytometry data

An R-Shiny app will help users filter data graphically, with live image previews.
While the image part may be tailored for data from fluorescence microscopy experiments, the graphical filter in this app is general purpose (i.e. useful in standard cell cytometry).

There is also another small app to "tag" single cells in the dataset with user defined options.

See:

  * `?rcell2::rcell2::shinyCell()`
  * `?rcell2::rcell2::tagCell()`
  * `?rcell2::rcell2::plotApp()`

# New Hu Moment functions for raw cell segmentation data

We implemented the `Hu moments` descriptors in R, and use them on masks generated by CellID. Note that the masks must be generated by the the CellID `mask_mod` branch (see: https://github.com/darksideoftheshmoo/cellID-linux/tree/mask_mod) either by TSV output or by encoding CellIDs in the pixel intensities of boundary and/or interior points.

# New kmeans filtering functions

The kmeans algotrithm helps filter cells based on clustering of CellID's variables computed from morphological and fluorescence information.

Use k-means and check out images of cells in each cluster. Then, filter them easily by cluster number.

See: `?rcell2::kmeans_clustering`

# Todo

* ~~Plot of a 2D grid of "representative" single cell images in a scatterplot (similar to EBImage).~~ Implemented in cellSpread, cellSpreadPlot, and "Pics" type plot in shinyCell.
* ~~Generic shiny function for filtering points in a custom ggplot~~. Implemented in plotApp.
* 1D / histogram filtering support in the filtering app.

[1]:https://www.tidyverse.org/
[2]:https://github.com/r-lib/devtools
[3]:https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/EBImage.html
